# 1. Introduction

Decision theory is the theory of rational decision making. A *decision maker* chooses an act from a *set of alternatives*. The *outcome* depends on the true *state of the world*, which in many cases is only partially known to the decision maker.

The decision faced by Columbus on the Canary Islands can be summarized in the *decision matrix* shown below:

| | Geographical hypothesis true  | There is some other land westwards | There's no land westwards |
| - | - | - | - |
| Sail westwards | Rich and famous  | Famous but not rich | Dead |
| Don't sail westwards | Status quo | Status quo | Status quo |

The outcome of staying at home would've been the same no matter whether his geographical hypothesis was true or not.

The ultimate aim of decision theory is to formulate hypotheses about rational decision making that are as accurate and precise as possible.

## 1.1. Normative and descriptive decision theory

Descriptive decision theories seek to explain and predict how people *actually* make decisions: empirical discipline, stemming from experimental psychology.

Normative theories seek to yield prescriptions about what decision makers are *rationally required* or *ought* to do. This book focuses on normative theories. Normative decision theory is better dealth with before we develop descriptive hypotheses.

## 1.2. Rational and right decisions

A decision can be rational without being right and right without being rational. The decision can turn out right but if you don't have any good reasons to believe you'll win, it's irrational.

A decision is right if and only if the decision maker chooses to do what she has most reason to do at the point in time at which the decision is made. The kind of rationality is instrumental rationality, which presupposes that the decision maker has some aim. To be instrumentally rational is to do whatever one has most reason to expect will fulfill one's aim.

## 1.3. Risk, ignorance and uncertainty

In decisions under *risk*, the decision maker knows the probability of the possible outcomes, whereas decisions under ignorance the probabilities are unknown or nonexistent. Uncertainty is used either as a synonym for ignorance, or as a broader term for risk and ignorance.

Decisions under ignorance are based on less information than decisions under risk, but doesn't mean that these decisions are any more difficult to make. If you have a decision to make in an area where it's never done before, and if the outcome doesn't change much if the method fails or if you don't do it altogether, you do it. Like an experimental surgery when you're chronically ill. In this case, the first alternative *dominates* the second.

## 1.4. Social choice theory and game theory

Not all decisions are made by *one* decision maker *not* taking into account what other decision makers (dm) are doing.

Social choice theory seeks to establish principles for how decisions involving more than one dm ought to be made. How do we aggregate the divergent beliefs and desires of a heterogeneous set of individuals into a collective decision?

In game theory, the outcomes depend on the decisions made by several dms. Each must decide considering mutual benefit, or go individual by considerations of risk minimization.