# 2. The decision matrix

Before taking a decision, we have to specify what the relevant *acts, states and outcomes* are. Decision trees as well as decision matrix can be used to visualize. There are three levels of abstraction:

1. The decision problem
    * Constituted by the entities of the world that prompt the dm to make a choice, or are relevant to that choice
2. A formalization of the decision problem
    * Made up of information about the decision to be made, irrespective of how that information is visualized
3. A visualization of the formulation

## 2.1. States

A state is part of the world that is not an outcome or an act (that can be performed by the agent in the present decision situation; acts performed by others can be thought of as states). But the outcome brought by an act can also be an act of the world. On that view, an act is a device that transforms one state of the world into another.

Only states that may affect the dm's preference among acts need to be taken into account. The states can be dependent on each other: this causal dependence can be addressed on 2 ways:

* The states must be causally independent of the acts in the formalization (used throught the book except on chapter 9)
* Avoid the notion of states altogether: works well if we know the probabilities of the outcomes.

States should be chosen such that the value of the outcomes under all states is causally independent of whether the state occurs or not.

## 2.2. Outcomes

In order to know which act to choose given a set of states, outcomes must be ranked in one way or another, from the worst to the best. How to do this is more exhaustively examined in chapter 5. Here we merely explain the difference between the various kinds of scales used for comparing outcomes.

In order to measure the value of an outcome, it's convenient to assign numbers to putcomes. Numbers referring to comparative evaluations of value are commonly called *utilities*, properly introduced in chapter 5. For now we use *value*.

Value can be measured on ordinal scales and cardinal scales. Ordinal scales are invariant up to positive monotone transformations, f(x) >= f(y) if and only if x >= y. Qualitative comparison of objects is allowed, no information about differences or ratios.

Cardinal scales embody more information than ordinal scales: 2 kinds: interval scales and ratio scales. 

* Interval scales accurately reflect the difference between the objects being measured. Quantitative comparison of objects, accurately reflects differences between objects. Example: Centigrad and Fahrenheit scales for temperature measurement
* A ratio scale U can be accurately transformed into an equivalent ratio scale V by multiplying U by a positive constant k. (linear function/interval scale). A pair of ratio scales are equivalent if and only if each can be transformed into the other by multiplying all values by some positive constant. Quantitative comparison of objects, accurately reflects ratios between them.

## 2.3. Acts

Outcomes can be conceived of as ordered pairs of acts and states. Outcome No omelette = (Add sixth egg, The sixth egg is rotten).

A *generic* act: sailing, walking, swimming, can be instantiated by different agents at different time intervals.

*Particular* acts are always carried out by specific agents at specific time intervals.

It's usually assumed that the acts considered by a dm are *alternative* acts. This requirement guarantees that a rational dm has to choose only one act. The set A is an *alternative-set* if and only if every member of A is a particular act. A has 2+ different members, and the members of A are agent-identical, time-identical, performable, incompatible in pairs and jointly exhaustive.

## 2.4. Rival formalizations

There can be plenty of formalizations of the same decision problem. Rival formalizations arise when 2+ formalizations are equally reasonable and strictly better than all other formalizations.

Rival formalizations can be troublesome if an act is judged to be rational in one optimal formalization but irrational in another.
