# 3. Decisions under ignorance

Ignorance: refers to cases in which the dm:

* knows what her alternatives are and what outcomes they may result in, but
* is unable to assign any probabilities to the states corresponding to the outcomes.

## 3.1. Dominance

An alternative **dominates** another when no matter what, the first alternative has better outcomes than the second.

One alternative is better than another if (but not only if) the agent knows for sure that she will be at least as well off if the first alternative is chosen, no matter what state of the world turns out to be the true state. 

* Strong dominance: a1 > a2 if and only if it's more rational to perform act a1 rather than act a2. (the strange symbol isn't '>', but a relation symbol)
* Weak dominance: a1 >= a2, a1 is at least as rational as a2

## 3.2. Maximin and leximin

The maximin principle focuses on the worst possible outcome of each alternative. One should maximize the minimal value obtainable with each act. If the worst possible outcome of one alternative is better than that of another, then the former should be chosen.

If there are 4 acts, and the worst possible outcomes of these are (1, -1, -4, 0), then we should definitely pick a1 because its worst outcome is the best of the worst outcomes. In the worst case we'd get a 1, but if we picked -4, in the worst case we'd get a -4 which is worse.

```math
Let min(a1) be the minimal value obtainable with act a1. Then, Maximin: a1 >= a2 iff min(a1) >= min(a2).
```

If there are two acts with the same worst outcome, the maximin rule says to be indifferent, so if act1 we can get $1 or $100 and with act2 $1 of $100, the maximin rule says pick any. But this doesn't sound right. The standard solution to this problem is to invoke the **lexical** maximin rule: if worst outcomes are equal, choose the alternative in which the *second worst* outcome is as good as possible. And recursively until there's a difference in the outcomes.

Let min1(a1) be the value of the worst outcome of act a1, and min2(a1) the value of the second worst outcome and minn(a1) the value of the nth worst outcome. Then,

```math
Leximin: a1 > a2 (expressing dominance) iff there's some positive integer n such that minn(a1) > minn(a2) and minm(a1) = minm(a2) for all m < n
```

These two rules allow the dm to transform a decision under ignorance into a decision under certainty. The dm doesn't know what the actual outcome of the choice will be, but she knows the worst possible outcome.

But is it wise to only look at the worst possible outcome? What if a1 yields (1, 100) and a2 (1.1, 1.1)? These rules would tell us to pick a1, but it seems rational to trade the risk of getting 1 instead of 1.1 for a chance of getting 100.

## 3.3. Maximax and the optimism-pessimism rule

Maximax rule: rationality requires us to prefer alternatives in which the best possible outcome is as good as possible, i.e. one should maximize the maximal value obtainable with an act.

The optimism-pessimism rule asks the dm to consider both the best and the worst possible outcomes of each alternative, and then choose an alternative according to her degree of optimism or pessimism.

If alpha means optimisn and belongs between [0, 1] (it must be constant throughout the evaluation of all alternatives), the value of the act is alpha\*max(a1) + (1-alpha)\*min(a1).

* max(a1): 100, min(a1): 10
* max(a2): 90, min(a2): 50
* optimism: 0.7
* value of a1 = 0.7\*100 + 0.3\*10 = 73
* value of a2 = 0.7\*90 + 0.3\*50 = 78
* With this optimism, a2 wins

```math
Optimism-pessimism: a1 > a2 (relation of dominance) iff alpha\*max(a1) + (1-alpha)\*min(a1) > alpha\*max(a2) + (1-alpha)\*min(a2)
```

This rule requires the outcomes to be in an ordinal scale.

But what about the nonminimal and nonmaximal outcomes? We could assign weights, but these by no means mean a probability.

## 3.4. Minimax regret

Sometimes when making a decision, the possible regret over not making it plays a relevant role in the decision making. Advocates of the minimax regret rule maintain that the best alternative is the one that minimizes the maximum amount of regret.

For each outcome, regret values can be calculated by substracting the value of the best outcome of each state from the value of the outcome in question.

Given a state s1 (winning the lottery), the best outcome would be 20 in a1, and 10 in a4. So the regret in (a4, s1) is 10-20 = -10. Doing that with all, we obtain the regret matrix. At the positions of the maximum outcomes, we get 0. The smallest number denotes the biggest regret.

The minimax regret rule urges dms to choose an alternative under which the max regret value is as low as possible (closest to 0). So the alternative with the best  'worst regret' over all alternatives.

The minimax regret rule is parallel to the maximin rule, they both select an alternative under which the worst-case scenario is as good as possible, but they operate on different descriptions of the relevant worst-case scenario (actual outcome vs. regret). Another difference is that the minimax regret rule requires that outcomes are compared on a *cardinal* scale, whereas the maximin rule operates on ordinal values.

Let Max{} be a function that returns the max value of a sequence of real numbers in the set {}. Let max(s1) be a function that returns the best possible outcome that might be achieved with any alternative if s1 is the true state of the world. Then,

```math
Minimax regret: a1 > a2 (relation of dominance) iff max{v(a1, s1) - max(s1), v(a1, s2) - max(s2), v(a2, s1) - max(s1), v(a2, s2) - max(s2)}
```

The biggest objection to minimax regret is the objection from irrelevant alternatives. By adding a nonoptimal alternative, which won't be chosen because even if it might contain the best sX, but all the others are very bad, our decision is changed.

A normatively plausible decision rule must not be sensitive to the addition if irrelevant alternatives --> minimax regret rule must be ruled out as an illegitimate rule.

But there are objections to ruling it out because of illegitimacy: if I'm thinking of buying a painting, I have 2 choices red or blue, I like red better. But then another painting comes into market, a red one that I don't really like. But now I change my decision and I buy the blue one because it's unique. Sometimes our preferences are based on relational properties such as uniqueness.

## 3.5. The principle of insufficient reason

This principle prescribes that if there's no reason to believe that one state of the world is more probable than another, then all states should be assigned equal probability. This transforms a decision under ignorance into a decision under risk by assigning equal probabilities to all states.

```math
a2 > a2 iff \sum_{x=1}^n v(a1, sx)/n > \sum_{x=1}^n v(a2, sx)/n
```

A problem with this is that it's extremely sensitive to the number of states we define. Theorists advocate for using symmetric states, but not all events can be described in such way.

Another objection is that if one has no reason to think that one state is more probable than another, it's strange to conclude that they are equally probable. It seems completely arbitrary to infer that all states are equally probable.

## 3.6. Randomized acts

We could randomize which act to make, which adds a new alternative, the act of randomizing between the other acts, and the outcomes of this new act are the averages of the other outcomes. This third act would be chosen by the maximin, leximin and minimax regret rules so it looks like it's a good idea.

But it's not clear what is gained by randomizing in extreme cases of die/survive, how can you die with a prob of 50%?

In the case of a coin, if you randomize and try the decision several times, you'll get 1/2 on average.