# 5. Utility

## 5.1. How to construct an ordinal scale

If we prefer one book over another, what does this mean precisely? Economists say that your preferences are revealed in your choice behavior, you prefer x to y iff you choose x over y whenever given the opportunity. But I could choose y by mistake, and it's not so easy to interpret between strict preference and indifference.

There are three symbols for preference, >, ~, >= (not really > but a strange symbol).

In your collection of books, completeness states that the following should hold: x > y, or x ~ y, or y > x. This rules out the possibility that you fail to muster any preference between some pairs of books. We also assume that strict preferences are asymmetric and negatively transitive.

Let's return to the problem of constructing an ordinal utility scale. What assumptions must we make about preference relations for this to be possible? What must we assume about preferences for there to exist a function u that assigns real numbers to all books in your collection such that better books are assigned higher numbers?

> x > y iff u(x) > u(y)

## 5.2. Von Neumann and Morgenstern's interval scale

Example: there are three bands in a concert, A is the best, B is regular, C is bad. I can either get a ticket to see B, or a lottery ticket to see A with 70% probability or C with 30%. For some reason, both options are attractive:

> 0.7u(A) + 0.3u(C) = u(B)

With three unknown variables, there are infinite possible solutions. But if utility is measured on an interval scale, we can solve it because the unit and end points of an interval scale can be chosen arbitrarily. We stipulate that the utility of the best outcome is 100, and that of the worst is 0. Then, 

> 0.7 * 100 + 0.3 * 0 = u(B) --> u(B) = 70

Now you're told there's a band D, slightly better than B. We don't know its utility. You are offered a ticket to watch d with probability `p` and C with probability `1-p`, where `p` is available and free to choose himself. To know D's utility, you ask which value of `p` would make me feel totally indifferent between the previous options and this one? After thinking about it, you decide you're indifferent between B, 78% chance of D combined with 22% chance of watching C.

> 1.0 * 70 = 0.78u(D) + 0.22 * 0 --> u(D) = 89.7

A problem with this theory is the assumption that the dm chooses in accordance with the principle of maximizing expected utility. Instead of making this assumption, Von Neumann and Morgenstern propose a set of constraints on rational preferences which imply that the dm behaves as if they are making decisions by calculating expected utilities.

They proved that if a dm's preferences over the sort of lotteries exemplified above satisfy a number of formal constraints or axioms, then the dm's choices can be represented by a function that assigns utilities to lotteries.

We assume Z is a finite set of basic prizes. L is the set of lotteries that can be constructed from Z by applying the following inductive definition:

1. Every basic prize in Z is a lottery
2. If A and B are lotteries, then so is the prospect of getting A with probability p and B with probability 1-p for every 0 < p < 1 
3. Nothing else is a lottery

The formula ApB will be used as an abbreviation for a lottery in which one wins A with probability p and B with probability 1-p.

The next assumptoin holds that the dm is able to state pairwise preferences between lotteries. This must fulfill the completeness and transitivity conditions.

The continuity condition, and further theorems can be found in the book page 107-113.

This theory of von Neumann and Morgenstern isn't about the meaning of utility, it's a claim about how to measure utility. But they propose just a partial theory.

## 5.3. Can utility be measured on a ratio scale?

Constant utility model:t he dm might sometimes fail to choose an option that maximizes utility in the second step of the choice process because she fails to choose the alternative that's best for her.

Random utility model: we might imagine that the dm in the second step always chooses an alternative with the highes utility, although the first step is probabilistic.

According to this view one and the same object can be assigned different utilities at two different times, even if everything else in the world is kept constant, because the act of assigning utilities to objects is essentially stochastic.

## 5.4. Can we define utility without being able to measure it?

We know that Jupiter is heavier than Mars, but few of us are able to explain how to actually measure the mass of a planet. If someone proposed a measurement procedure that conflicts with our intuitive understanding of mass, we'd have reason to rejec that procedure insofar as we wish to measure the thing we call mass.

Theories of utility re sometimes interpreted as operational definitions, as definitions that fix the meaning of a term by setting up an empirical method for observing the entity the term is referring to. It doesn't make sense to distinguish meaning from measurement. As long as the concept of utility is merely used for descriptive purposes, this operational approach seems fine. But when considering normative applications, it's far from clear that an operational definition is what we're looking for.

More on this in pages 118-120.
