# 7. The philosophy of probability

Philosophers disagree about what probability is, there are 2 camps in this debate:

* Objectivism: maintains that probability statements refer to some facts in the external world
* Subjectivism: denies that probability statements can be understood as claims about the external world. Probability statements refer to the degree to which the speaker believes something
    - When you say that the probability is 1/2 that your suitor will make a marriage proposal, this means that you believe to a certain degree that this proposal will be made, and the strength of your belief can be represented by the number 1/2

In this chapter we outline three different versions of the objective interpretation: the classical, frequentistic and propenstiy, discuss the epistemic interpretation, and finally state and assess two versions of the subjective view.

## 7.1. The classical interpretation

This interpretation holds the probability of an event to be a fraction of the total number of possible ways in which the event can occur. 

> Probability = number of favorable classes / Number of possible classes

This presupposes that all possible outcomes are equally likely, but this is done on purpose. Advocates of the classical approach say that we determine the probability of an event by first reducing the random process to a set of equally likely outcomes, then we count the number of outcomes in which the event occurs and divide by the total number of possible outcomes.

## 7.2. The frequency interpretation

This holds that the probability if an event is the ratio between the number of times the event has occurred divided by the total number of observed cases. If I toss a coin 1k times and it lands heads up 517 times, then probability is 0.517.

> Probability = total number of positive instances / Total number of trials

## 7.3. The propensity interpretation

Probabilities can be identified with certain features of the external world, namely the propensty or disposition or tendency of an object to give rise to a certain effect. Symmetrical coins typically have a propensity or disposition or tendency to lay heads up abotu every second time they're tossed, which means that probability is 1/2.

The motivation for this approach is that it avoid the problem of assigning probabilities to unique events faced by the frequency view. But it also seeks to connect propensities with long-run frequencies whenever the latter existed.

## 7.4. Logical and epistemic interpretations

Logical interpretation: probability is a logical relation between a hypothesis and the evidence supporting it. The probability relation is best thought of as a generalization of the principles of deductive logic, from the deterministic case to the indeterministic one.

If an unhappy housewife claims that the probability that her marriage will end in a divorce is 0.9, this means that the evidence she has at hand (no romantic dinners, etc.) entails the hypothesis that the marriage will end in a divorce to a certain degree, which can be represented by the number 0.9.

## 7.5. Subjective probability

In this approach, probability is a kind of mental phenomenon. Probabilities aren't part of the external world, they are entities that human beings somehow create in their minds.

If you claim that the probability for rain tomorrow is 0.9, this merely means that your subjective degree of belief that it'll rain tomorrow is strong and that the strength of this belief can be represented by the number 0.9.

(more theorems and approaches in the book, it's too philosophical)