# 8. Bayesian and pragmatic arguments

> Bayesian decision theories are formal theories of rational agency: they aim to tell us both what the properties of a rational state of mind are... and what action it's rational for an agent to perform, given her staet of mind (Bradley, 2007)

Bayesianism has 2 distinct components:

1. Tells you what your state of mind ought to be like: epistemic
2. tells you how you ought to act given that state of mind: deliberative

Bayesian epistomology provides a set of structural restrictions on what it's permissible to believe, and how one is permitted to revise those beliefs in light of new information. One is free to believe whatever one wishes *as long as* one's beliefs can be represented by a subjective probability function, and those beliefs are updated in accordance with Bayes' theorem.

A major issue of disagreement among scholars working on Bayesian epistomology is how to determine the 'prior probabilities' needed for getting the Bayesian machinery off the ground (chapter 6). An influential strategy for tackling this problem is to prove that even people with different priors at the beginning of a series of experiments will come to agree in the end, after sufficiently many iterations.

The deliberative component of Bayesianism tells the agent what it is rational to do given her present (and hopefully perfectly rational) state of mind.

1. Subjective degrees of belief can be represented by a probability function defined in terms of the dm's preferences over uncertain prospects (chapter 5)
2. The dm's desires can be represented by a utility function defined in terms of preferences over uncertain prospects (chapter 7)
3. Rational dms act as if they maximize subjective expected utility

(dm = decision maker)

A linear measure of utility has to be established, because most agents have a decreasing marginal utility for money.

## 8.1. Why should we accept the axioms?

Bayesian decision theory is an axiomatic theory. The central components of all versions of Bayesian decision theory are the transitivity, completeness and independence axions.

Why shold we believe the axioms? We have sufficient reason to accept a preference axiom iff it can somehow be pragmatically justified. Pragmatic arguments seek to show that dms who violate certain principles of rationality may face a decision problem in which it's certain that they will stand to lose, come what may.

Money pump argument: you have x, I have y. I offer you to swap if you pay me 1ct. Then I offer to swap again if you pay me 1ct. If you say to both, you're same as before with x, but with 2cts less. If we do this forever, you're bankrupt. Therefore you can't prefer x over y and y over x.

## 8.2. Must a rational preference be transitive?

A more sophisticated argument than the money pump argument tries to show that anyone whose preferences are cyclic (hence not transitive), might end up in a situation in which it's certain that she will lose an infinite amount of money.

You prefer x to y, y to z, and z to x. Cyclic preference ordering. Imagine you have z, and you're invited to swap z for y. Because you prefer y to z, you switch, even paying 1ct. Then again swapping for x, you pay 1ct because x > y. And then swap x for z, which you do. same as before, you have z and have 3cts less.

A criticism for the money pump problem is that some preferences can't be counted with money, such as health.

## 8.3. Must a rational preference be complete?

The completeness axiom: a rational dm must either prefer one object to another or be indifferent between the two. Can it be justified with some pragmatic argument?

An influential argument against the completenes axiom is the small improvement argument. In a choice between $10M and a human life, the dm neither strictly prefers one to the other. But that doesn't mean she's indifferent. If both things are regarded to be equally valuable, it follows that if one option were modified by attaching an arbitrary small bonus, then the preference must tip over in favor of whichever object was thus modified.

## 8.4. Must a rational preference satisfy the independence axiom?

Many decision theorists have aimed to construct a scenario where a dm who violates the independence axiom will stand to lose, come what may. Examples in page 191-194.

## 8.5. Can Bayesians be money pumped?

It's widely believed that agents who maximize subjective expected utility are immune to pragmatic arguments. But if we believe that some acts have an infinite expected utility, this may not be true. Examples in pages 194-197.

## 8.6. Do Bayesians put the cart before the horse?

If you accept the Bayesian view, the answers to nearly all questions will always be based on the axioms discussed above.

An objection to Bayesianism is that Bayesians put the cart before the horse from the point of view of the deliberating agent. A dm who is able to state a complete preference ordering over uncertain prospects, as required by Bayesian theories, already knows what to do. Bayesian dms don't get any new, action-guiding info from their theories. The argument seeks to show that even if all the axiomatic constraints on preferences proposed by Bayesians were perfectly acceptable from a normative point of view, the Bayesian representation and uniqueness theorems would provide no direct action guidance.

## 8.7. Non-Bayesian decision theory

Two subclasses can be defined: externalist and internalist theories.

Externalists argue that an act is rational not merely by virtue of what the dm believes and desires. The belief-desire model is too narrow, rationality is also constituted by facts about the external world.

Internals agree with Bayesians that the dm's beliefs and desires are all tthat matters when adjudicating whether an act is rational or irrational. But internalism denies that rational dms merely act as if they were acting from the principle of maximizing expected utility. They claim that rational dms choose an act over another because its subjective expected utility is optimal. Preferences over risky acts aren't just a tool used for measuring degrees of belief and desire, instead one's beliefs and desires constitute reasons for preferring one risky act over another.
