# 11. Game Theory 1: Basic concepts and zero-sum games

Game theory studies decisions in which the outcome depends partly on what other people do, like chess. The assumption of common knowledge of rationality (CKR) determines which move I will eventually choose, as well as how my opponent will respond. The move I make decides my opponent's next move.

Two companies sell the same things and are debating whether to put high or low prices on products. If both go for high, both earn a lot. If both go for low, they earn something. But if their decisions differ, one loses a lot. Because it's rational for both to keep low prices, because that's how they earn most money no matter what, both will choose low prices. The optimal outcome of both players setting their prices high is not rational.

## 11.1. The prisoner's dilemma

(skipped description). Both players choosing the rational decision forces them into an outcome that's worse for both of them. This dilemma shows that what's optimal for each invidivual need not coincide with what's optimal for the group. Individual rationality sometimes comes into conflict with group rationality.

Even if the two prisoners communicate, at the time of deciding, each prisoner is better off by confesing, so they confess. Communication doesn't add any robustness.

Prisoner's dilemmas arise whenever a game is symmetrical, in the sense that everyone is essentially facing the same strategies and outcomes.

Some mathematicians pointed out that the prisoner's dilemma has a connection to the Newcomb's problem. Both players are rational, and both players will confess iff the other one confesses. and the other prisoner will deny the charges iff you do so. But sitting alone in your cell, you can't be 100% certain of this. Let's say you have 0.95 probability that both of you will choose the same strategy. So you're facing a decision problem under risk.

| | He confesses  | He doesn't confess | 
| - | - | - |
| You confess | -10 (p=0.95) | -1 (p=0.05) |
| You don't confess | -20 (p=0.05) | -2 (p=0.95) |

Your expected utility of confessing is -9.55 and not doing so is only -2.9, so the principle of maximizing expected utility recommends you not to confess. But applying the dominance principle, -10 is better than -20 and -1 is better than -2, so you should confess. There's a clash, like in Newcomb's problem, between two of the most fundamental principles of rationality.

## 11.2. A taxonomy of games

The prisoner's dilemma is noncooperative, simultaneous-strategy, symmetric, nonzero-sum and finite game. In this subsection we explain

* zero-sum vs. nonzero-sum games
    - zero-sum: you win exactly as much as your oponnent(s) lose. Casino, chess. The total amount of money or units of utility is fixed
* noncooperative vs. cooperative games
    - noncooperative: players can't form binding agreements, because in some noncooperative games players do in fact cooperate. But they do so because it's in their own interest. But the game is still noncooperative if there are no legal rules or other mechanisms forcing players to keep their agreements.
* simultaneous-move vs. sequential-move games
    - simultaneous-move: players decide on their move without knowing what the other players will  do. no player is aware of the others' decision. Rock paper and scissors. 
    - In sequential-move games, players have some or full information about the strategies played by the others. Chess.
* games with perfect information vs. games with imperfect information
    - players have full information about the strategies of the others. All games with perfect information are sequential, but not all sequential games are with perfect information.
* nonsymmetric vs. symmetric games
    - symmetric: all players face the same strategies and outcomes. The identities of the players don't matter.
* two-person vs. n-person games
    - it's not about number of people involved, but number of players.
* mixed vs. pure strategies
    - mixed: pure strategy but with some probability between 0 and 1. To play a mixed strategy in the prisoner's dilemma is to confess with probability p and deny charges with probability 1-p. The player chooses which action to take by using some random device.
* fixed vs. infinitely repeated games
* noniterated vs. iterated
    - noniterated is only played once

## 11.3. Common knowledge and dominance reasoning

There's no unified theory that can be applied to solve all different kinds of games. But many games can be solved by just applying the dominance principle in a clever way.

This technique is based on some assumptions: 

* all players are rational and try to play strategies that best promote the objective they consider to be important. 
* All players know that the other players are rational. This assumption is sometimes is referred to as the assumption of nth-order common knowledge of rationality (nth order of CKR)
* The dominance principle is a valid principle of rationality

To solve a game is to figure out which strategies rational players would choose if confronted with the game in question. Two players (Row and Col) have three strategies each to choose from. 

| | C1  | C2 | C3 | 
| - | - | - | - |
| R1 | 1,3 | 2,2 | 1,0 |
| R2 | 3,2 | 3,3 | 2,7* |
| R3 | 1,1 | 8,2 | 1,4 |

R2 strictly dominates R1, so Row will either choose R2 or R3. Which makes C3 strategy attractive for Col. Because Row won't play R1, C3 dominates C2 and C1. So Col will play C3. And so Row decides to take R2. If both players are rational and the assumption of CKR holds, R2 + C3 wins. The pair with the asterisk is the winner.

| | C1  | C2 | C3 | 
| - | - | - | - |
| R1 | 1,3 | 2,4 | 1,0 |
| R2 | 3,3 | 3,3 | 0,1 |
| R3 | 4,2 | 2,0 | 1,3 |

There's no dominating strategy for R, ad same for Col (ane: C1?). So we need some other principle to start playing this game.

## 11.4. Two-person zero-sum games

This game was thoroughly analyzed by von Neumann and Morgenstern in the 1940s. These kind of games have 2 features: it's always played by only two players, and whatever amount of utility os gained by one player is lost by the other. The first 3 for example, if Row earns 3, Col loses 3.

| | C1  | C2 | C3 | 
| - | - | - | - |
| R1 | 3 | -3 | 7 |
| R2 | 4* | 5 | 6 |
| R3 | 2 | 7 | -1 |

Row wants to get the highest numbers, while Col the smallest. So Row takes R2, and Col C1. If Col thinks that Row will choose R2, then he will choose C1 always. And vice versa.

> A pair of strategies os in equilibrium iff it holds that once this pair of strategies is chosen, none of the players could reach a better outcome by unilaterally switching to another strategy

The pair (R2, C1) is in equilibrium. A way to find equilibrium strategies of two-person zero-sum games is to find strategies that fulfill the minimax condition. This is a sufficient but not a necessary condition, it doesn't select all equilibria. The minimax condition tells us that *a pair of strategies are in equilibrium if (but not only if) the outcome determined by the strategies equals the minimal value of the row and the maximal value of the column.*

## 11.5. Mixed strategies and the minimax theorem

The minimax criterion shown above isn't sufficient to solve every two-person zero-sum game. In this example there's no equilibrium. 

| | C1  | C2 | C3 | 
| - | - | - | - |
| R1 | 0 | -100 | 100 |
| R2 | 100 | 0 | -100 |
| R3 | -100 | 100 | 0 |

The way to solve this game is rolling a die. If I throw a die and choose each pure strategy with probability 1/3, then the expected utility of my mixed strategy will be 0, no matter what probabilities Col assigns to her strategies. And Col reasons in the exact same way. So this pair of mixed strategies is in equilibrium.

In general, it can be shown that every two-person zero-sum game has a solution, and 'are not difficult to find'. There is always a pair of strategies in equilibrium, and if there's more than one, they have the same expected utility.

## Questions

In what way, if any, can game theory be viewed as an instance of decision making under ignorance or risk?

Each player has to select a move without knowing what the other player will do. In many decision problems the probability of the states is independent of what move is selected by the player. But Newcomb style problems indicate that this isn't always the case. Some authors take this line of thought to show there's no deep, fundamental difference between game theory and the theory of individual decision making.