# 13. Social choice theory

A group of friends want to go on vacation together, and they put the destination up for a vote.

* Megan prefers a to b, and b to c (a > b > c) (> denoting preference)
* Joe prefers b to c, and c to a (b > c > a)
* Nick prefers c to a, and a to b (c > a > b)

As a group, they prefer a to b, in a pairwise vote it'd get 2 votes. Also, the group prefers c to a, and also b to c. The group preferences are circular, although the individuals aren't. This is called the voting paradox.

How should a group aggregate the preferences of its individual members into a joint preference ordering?

## 13.1. The social choice problem

Social choice theory attempts to analyze group decisions as precisely as possible. They have to make their normative assumptions very explicit. A social choice problem is any decision problem faced by a group in which each individual is able to state ordinal preferences over outcomes. Each individual's preferences must satisfy the axioms in 5.1: completeness, asymmetry and transitivity. Once everyone has stated such ordinal preferences, we have a set of individual preference orderings. Then we somehow have to combine the individual preference ordering into a *social preference ordering*, a preference ordering that reflects the preferences of the group.

A social state is a state of the world that includes everything that individuals care about. In the travel example, the destinations. The term *social welfare function* SWF refers to any decision rule that aggregates a set of individual preference orderings over social states into a social preference ordering over those states. The majority rule is an exaple of SWF.

The aim of social choice theory is to analyze if and how a set of individual preference orderings G can be aggregated in a systematic manner into a social preference ordering S. An SWF is a mapping from G to S.

Example:

* M: a > b > c > d > e > f
* N: b > a > c > e > d > f
* O: a > b > d > c > e > f
* Q: a > b > c > d > e > f

For the sake of ilustration, we pick the majority rule. 2 of them prefer a to b, one is indifferent, and the other holds the opposite preference. Then, S should list a before b. By counting all the 'votes', S: a > b > c > d > e > f.

In this case, S = M, but that's because of Q's preference, SWF should always be nondictatorial, it mustn't be the case that S always coincides with the preference ordering of a particular individual.

Definition: a group D, which might be a single-member group, which is part of the group of all individuals G, is *decisive with respect to* the ordered pair of social states (a,b) iff state a is socially preferred to b whenever everyone in D prefers a to b. A group that's decisive with respect to all pairs of social states is simply *decisive*.

Nondictatorship: no single individual, i.e. no single-member group D of the group G is decisive.

Ordering: for every possible combination of individual preference orderings, the social preference ordering must be complete, asymmetric and transitive.

## 13.2. Arrow's impossibility theorem

Arrow proved that there's no social welfare function (SWF) that meets the conditions of nondictatorship and ordering, as well as 2 additional conditions to be introduced shortly <-- Arrow's impossibility theorem. Social decisions can never be rationally justified, because every possible mechanism for generating a social preference ordering is certain to violate at least one of Arrow's conditions.

Arrow requires that if everyone in the gropu prefers a to b, then the group should prefer a to b --> Pareto condition. A group of people is decisive with respect to the ordered pair (a,b) iff society prefers a to b whenever everyone in the group prefers a to b. and if the group is decisive with respect to all states, it's simply decisive.

> Pareto's condition: the group of all individuals in society is decisive.

Arrow's other condition, known as independence of irrelevant alternatives (different from the principle with the same name discussed in Chapter 3, which is a principle for individual decision making under ignorance). The social arnking of a and b should depend only on individual preferences over *that* pair of social states. The social ranking of a and b must *not* depend on how some third irrelevant social state c is ranked by the individuals.

* Old Mark: a > b > c
* Old Nicole: c > a > b
* a ranked higher than b
* New Mark: c > a > b
* New Nicole: a > c > b
* a still ranked higher than b, *c* shouldn't matter

> Independence of irrelevant alternatives: if all individuals have the same preference between a and b in 2 different sets of individual preference orderings G and G', then society's preference between a and b must be the same in G and G'

This condition excludes all SWFs sensitive to relational properties of the individual preference orderings (page 294 of book).

Arrow's impossibility theorem states that no SWF satisfies independence of irrelevance alternatives, Pareto, nondictatorship and the ordering conditions.

## 13.3. Sen on liberalism and the Pareto principle

Amartya Sen argues that the Pareto principle is incompatible with the basic ideals of liberalism.

In a liberal society, if someone wants to have pink walls rather than white walls at home, we should permit this unusual preference, even if the majority would prefer to see white walls. But this absolute freedom for the individual doesn't apply to all choices, only to some.

Sen proposes a minimal condition of liberalism, according to which there's at least one pair of alternative (a,b) for each individual such that if the individual prefers a to b, then society should prefer a to b, no matter what others prefer.

> Minimal liberalism: there are at least 2 individuals in society such that for each of them there's at least one pair of alternatives with respect to which she's decisive, that is, there's a pair a and b, such that if she prefers a to b, then society prefers a to b.

## 13.4. Harsanyi's utilitarian theorems

Harsanyi defends an utilitarian solution to the problem of social choice, according to which the social preference ordering should be entirely determined by the sum total of individual utility levels in society. If a single individual strongly prefers a high tax rate over a low tax rate, and all others disagree, then society should nevertheless prefer a high tax rate given that the preference of the single individual is sufficiently strong.

> Individual rationality: all individual preference orderings satisfy the von Neumann and Morgenstern axioms for preferences over lottery (section 5.2)


